en/dynamic_data_in_templates/README.md, before:

# Dynamic data in templates

We have different pieces in place: the `Post` model is defined in `models.py`, we have `post_list` in `views.py` and the template added. But how will we actually make our posts appear in our HTML template? Because that is what we want to do – take some content (models saved in the database) and display it nicely in our template, right?

This is exactly what *views* are supposed to do: connect models and templates. In our `post_list` *view* we will need to take the models we want to display and pass them to the template. In a *view* we decide what (model) will be displayed in a template.

OK, so how will we achieve this?

We need to open our `blog/views.py` in our code editor. So far `post_list` *view* looks like this:

{% filename %}blog/views.py{% endfilename %}
```python
from django.shortcuts import render

def post_list(request):
    return render(request, 'blog/post_list.html', {})
```

Remember when we talked about including code written in different files? Now is the moment when we have to include the model we have written in `models.py`. We will add the line `from .models import Post` like this:

{% filename %}blog/views.py{% endfilename %}
```python
from django.shortcuts import render
from .models import Post
```

The dot before `models` means *current directory* or *current application*. Both `views.py` and `models.py` are in the same directory. This means we can use `.` and the name of the file (without `.py`). Then we import the name of the model (`Post`).

But what's next? To take actual blog posts from the `Post` model we need something called `QuerySet`.

## QuerySet

You should already be familiar with how QuerySets work. We talked about them in [Django ORM (QuerySets) chapter](../django_orm/README.md).

So now we want published blog posts sorted by `published_date`, right? We already did that in QuerySets chapter!

{% filename %}blog/views.py{% endfilename %}
```python
Post.objects.filter(published_date__lte=timezone.now()).order_by('published_date')
```

So, let's open the `blog/views.py` file in the code editor, and add this piece of code to the function `def post_list(request)` -- but don't forget to first add `from django.utils import timezone`:

{% filename %}blog/views.py{% endfilename %}
```python
from django.shortcuts import render
from django.utils import timezone
from .models import Post

def post_list(request):
    posts = Post.objects.filter(published_date__lte=timezone.now()).order_by('published_date')
    return render(request, 'blog/post_list.html', {})
```

The last missing part is passing the `posts` QuerySet to the template context. Don't worry – we will cover how to display it in a later chapter.

Please note that we create a *variable* for our QuerySet: `posts`. Treat this as the name of our QuerySet. From now on we can refer to it by this name.

In the `render` function we have one parameter `request` (everything we receive from the user via the Internet) and another giving the template file (`'blog/post_list.html'`). The last parameter, `{}`, is a place in which we can add some things for the template to use. We need to give them names (we will stick to `'posts'` right now). :)  It should look like this: `{'posts': posts}`. Please note that the part before `:` is a string; you need to wrap it with quotes: `''`.

So finally our `blog/views.py` file should look like this:

{% filename %}blog/views.py{% endfilename %}
```python
from django.shortcuts import render
from django.utils import timezone
from .models import Post

def post_list(request):
    posts = Post.objects.filter(published_date__lte=timezone.now()).order_by('published_date')
    return render(request, 'blog/post_list.html', {'posts': posts})
```

That's it! Time to go back to our template and display this QuerySet!

Want to read a little bit more about QuerySets in Django? You should look here: https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.2/ref/models/querysets/

Commit message:

Be more explicit about next steps with QuerySet
When I was reading through the tutorial, I got to this section and read

```
The last missing part is passing the `posts` QuerySet to the template
context. Don't worry – we will cover how to display it in a later
chapter.
```

On a first read, this confused me -- I thought in both sentences we were
talking about the same action (passing `posts` into the `render` call
and displaying it in the template); making it additionally confusing
that we were doing _some_ work in this chapter about passing in posts.

I wondered whether the "next chapter" sentence was even necessary, and
found this in the commit logs:
https://github.com/DjangoGirls/tutorial/commit/8db3c9174e1754bbaaaa07535d4fe35ffa98713a.
Noting that the ordering of the sentences had confused participants, and
they apparently wanted to hear that they were going to cover displaying
`posts` before an explanation of what `posts` was, I'm inferring that
they have an intuition that this is missing and want to hear what the
next steps are.

So I tried to break up that sentence into two clearly separate steps,
explaining what we'll do next and what we'll do later.

en/dynamic_data_in_templates/README.md, after:

# Dynamic data in templates

We have different pieces in place: the `Post` model is defined in `models.py`, we have `post_list` in `views.py` and the template added. But how will we actually make our posts appear in our HTML template? Because that is what we want to do – take some content (models saved in the database) and display it nicely in our template, right?

This is exactly what *views* are supposed to do: connect models and templates. In our `post_list` *view* we will need to take the models we want to display and pass them to the template. In a *view* we decide what (model) will be displayed in a template.

OK, so how will we achieve this?

We need to open our `blog/views.py` in our code editor. So far `post_list` *view* looks like this:

{% filename %}blog/views.py{% endfilename %}
```python
from django.shortcuts import render

def post_list(request):
    return render(request, 'blog/post_list.html', {})
```

Remember when we talked about including code written in different files? Now is the moment when we have to include the model we have written in `models.py`. We will add the line `from .models import Post` like this:

{% filename %}blog/views.py{% endfilename %}
```python
from django.shortcuts import render
from .models import Post
```

The dot before `models` means *current directory* or *current application*. Both `views.py` and `models.py` are in the same directory. This means we can use `.` and the name of the file (without `.py`). Then we import the name of the model (`Post`).

But what's next? To take actual blog posts from the `Post` model we need something called `QuerySet`.

## QuerySet

You should already be familiar with how QuerySets work. We talked about them in [Django ORM (QuerySets) chapter](../django_orm/README.md).

So now we want published blog posts sorted by `published_date`, right? We already did that in QuerySets chapter!

{% filename %}blog/views.py{% endfilename %}
```python
Post.objects.filter(published_date__lte=timezone.now()).order_by('published_date')
```

So, let's open the `blog/views.py` file in the code editor, and add this piece of code to the function `def post_list(request)` -- but don't forget to first add `from django.utils import timezone`:

{% filename %}blog/views.py{% endfilename %}
```python
from django.shortcuts import render
from django.utils import timezone
from .models import Post

def post_list(request):
    posts = Post.objects.filter(published_date__lte=timezone.now()).order_by('published_date')
    return render(request, 'blog/post_list.html', {})
```

To display our QuerySet on our blog's post list, we have two things left to do:
1. Pass the `posts` QuerySet to the template context, by changing the `render` function call. We'll do this now.
2. Modify the template to display the `posts` QuerySet. We'll cover this in a later chapter.

Please note that we create a *variable* for our QuerySet: `posts`. Treat this as the name of our QuerySet. From now on we can refer to it by this name.

In the `render` function we have one parameter `request` (everything we receive from the user via the Internet) and another giving the template file (`'blog/post_list.html'`). The last parameter, `{}`, is a place in which we can add some things for the template to use. We need to give them names (we will stick to `'posts'` right now). :)  It should look like this: `{'posts': posts}`. Please note that the part before `:` is a string; you need to wrap it with quotes: `''`.

So finally our `blog/views.py` file should look like this:

{% filename %}blog/views.py{% endfilename %}
```python
from django.shortcuts import render
from django.utils import timezone
from .models import Post

def post_list(request):
    posts = Post.objects.filter(published_date__lte=timezone.now()).order_by('published_date')
    return render(request, 'blog/post_list.html', {'posts': posts})
```

That's it! Time to go back to our template and display this QuerySet!

Want to read a little bit more about QuerySets in Django? You should look here: https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.2/ref/models/querysets/
